- [Zac] Are you all
right to grab the back end?
- [Derek] Uh, well, not at the moment.
- Not yet.
Get him up.
You gotta lock him in.
A scratch from this
species will knock you.
- Knock you down...
Could kill you? Or...
- Oh definitely, yeah, yeah, yeah.
- Okay.
So I am back in Australia,
and, of course, I'm a reminded
that everything in this
country is trying to kill you,
particularly snakes and spiders,
and here at the Australian Reptile Park
they actually milk snakes and spiders
so they can use their
venom to make antivenom
and save lives.
Let's go see how they do it.
- All right, so come on in, man.
This is without a doubt
the most dangerous room in the country.
You're currently
surrounded floor to ceiling
with venomous snakes.
- And the only thing
that keeps the snakes in
is those little locks?
- Yeah, just the little
locks and the thin glass.
(suspenseful music)
- [Derek] Did a snake actually do that?
- Yeah.
So a kid was tapping on the glass.
I told him not to,
his parents are like nah, it's all good.
And I'm like, don't tap on the glass, man.
The snake goes, (thumps fist)
The kid ran out with the
smelling of a crap, so yeah.
(Derek laughs)
- For real?
- Yeah, oh yeah.
He went (mimics a kid screaming)
He went screaming out the room.
In Australia we lose one
to three people per annum
to snake bite.
Internationally estimates by
the World Health Organization
is 120,000.
So not only do we have some of the best
antivenom products
anywhere on the planet,
but we have a federally
funded antivenom program,
which means no matter who you are,
you get antivenom for free.
So we'll probably play
with a big coastal taipan
to start with.
- Yeah.
So why are we starting big?
- Oh we may as well.
(Derek laughs)
- You tell me what I need to do.
- Righty-O
I'm just gonna grab a vial from behind you
'cause obviously we use
only the most highly scientific
pieces of equipment here
at the Reptile Park.
- Got it.
- It's our shot glass.
- Beautiful.
- And I might even get
you to hold that for me
- Great.
- For a second.
This is one of our big boys.
Hopefully he's in a good mood.
As you can see, quite a large individual.
- Wow.
- Now what we're gonna do.
- Yeah.
- Is pin him.
Now, wait, wait, wait.
Get him up.
Righty-O
There you go, you hold that,
I'll take that vial off you.
- Okay.
(Nervous laughter)
This feels absurd.
- There we go.
As you can see, he's keen on the killing.
Now snakes aren't stupid.
He doesn't wanna bite the jar,
he wants to bite me.
Finger is the target.
(Laughs hysterically)
There we go.
- Oh my goodness.
That was a lot of venom
delivered very quickly.
- Yeah, they're not mucking around.
- Wow.
- Now what we'll do is we'll
actually give his venom glands
a little bit of a massage.
So what you would consider his cheeks,
give them a little bit of a roll,
see if we can get an extra drop or two
'cause every drop matters.
- [Derek] Uh-huh.
- Now, because my hand's
starting to cramp up,
I'm gonna put him away.
So I'll get you guys to jump back for me.
And this is the sketchy bit.
- Yeah.
- When you get him out, you got the hook,
when you're putting him back,
it's just who's quicker.
Ready?
Two.
(cage door shuts)
- Are your hands trembling a little bit?
- Yeah, every time.
- Look at that
So how much venom do you actually need
to make antivenom?
- [Zac] About 15.
- [Derek] 15 snakes to make
one vial of antivenom?
- Yeah.
- [Derek] Venom evolved from saliva
and it's used primarily for
catching and digesting prey.
Each species of snake
has a different venom
tailored to the specific
animals they hunt.
The venom was originally squirted
into a snake's mouth by the back teeth,
and to this day,
almost 2/3 of all snakes are rear fanged.
- Now why the rear tooth, you might ask?
Well, it's because the venom gland itself
is actually behind the snake's eye.
So the shortest distance for a duct
is directly downwards to
the back end of the top jaw.
- [Derek] In some species,
evolutionary pressures caused
the fangs to move closer
and closer to the front of the jaw,
improving the snake's ability
to catch and kill prey.
While the location of
the fangs was evolving,
so were the fangs themselves.
They started off as smooth ordinary teeth
with venom flowing down the outside,
but over time,
some snake lineages evolved
a groove in each fang
to channel the flow of venom.
In some species, the groove
became deeper and deeper
eventually closing in
to form a hollow tube,
and now the teeth literally
inject venom into prey.
But this is not the norm.
Only 1/7 of the world's
snakes have hollow fangs,
but, of course, almost all the
venomous snakes in Australia
do have hollow fangs,
so we set up this macro
shot to take a closer look.
- This one's rolling.
That one's rolling.
We're ready when you're.
- We're ready.
Perfect.
- All right, everyone's ready?
- Yep.
Wow.
It's got like jets
Jets of venom coming out.
Has this guy not been
milked in a while or?
- Yeah, it's been a little while.
(upbeat music)
Not only do we have
some of the most toxic
snakes on the planet here,
we also selectively breed them
for the production of antivenom.
They're bred to produce more venom
than their wild counterparts.
So some of our coastal taipans
are producing five, six
nearly seven times what
their wild counterpart would,
and that's just from selective breeding.
You find your two most psychotic ones,
you put them together,
you hope for the best and
the absolute worst comes out.
(Laughs)
So keeps you on your toes.
- That sounds horrendous.
So you're saying that
these are the most venomous
snakes in the world,
and then you have bred
them to be more venomous?
- Yeah, they're super snakes.
A scratch from any of these
animals could kill you.
And some of these snakes are giving 4.5,
4.9 grams of venom per bite,
which is just stupid amounts.
- We spoke to venom
expert, Timothy Jackson
who argued these snakes produce more venom
because they are regularly
milked, unlike wild snakes.
Either way, the snakes in
this room contain more venom
than virtually any others on earth.
- We house the second, the
third, the fourth, the fifth,
and about the 12th or 13th most toxic,
depending on who you talk to.
- [Derek] One bite from a King Cobra
contains enough venom to kill 13,000 mice,
and we know this because
of a study from 1979
that tested the venoms of 25
different species of snake
on lab mice.
From this, we can estimate
that the venom from one King Cobra bite
could kill around four humans,
though to be precise,
we'd have to say four human-sized rodents
because thankfully, no one's
tested these venoms on humans.
And by this measure,
the most venomous snake in the
world is the inland taipan,
which conveniently lives
in the middle of Australia.
A bite from the inland taipan
has enough venom to kill
half a million mice,
or more than 100 humans.
So yeah, why not milk that one next?
- So the next one, we're gonna
step it up another notch.
So this is the inland taipan,
also known as the fierce snake,
the most toxic land snake on the planet.
These guys have the ability
with one drop of venom
to knock over 100 adult humans.
So stupidly toxic.
So quite a lot smaller
than the last couple
of animals we've used,
but makes up for it in toxicity.
Very, very quick and very
naughty when he wants to be,
but an absolutely gorgeous pattern.
You can grab that bit for me, mate.
- Yes.
- I'm gonna grab this
vial from behind you.
And as you can see,
he's very keen on the killing.
There we go.
- [Derek] That is extraordinary.
The most venomous snake in the world.
- Just incredible animals, aren't they?
(cage door shuts)
(laughs)
- [Derek] That was quick.
- Yeah, those ones make me proper nervous.
I don't know about you guys,
but I'm sweating.
- [Derek] Can you see the hands?
- The moment I stop doing
that after a milking
is the day I quit.
- [Derek] The concept of
the most venomous snake
is complicated
because snakes evolved
their venom specifically
for potency against their usual prey,
in turn, their prey evolved
resistance to their venom.
The honey badger, for example,
is almost completely
immune to Cobra venom.
So the lethality of a
bite depends on the snake,
the animal that got bitten,
and the amount of venom injected.
The reason scientists test
different venoms on lab mice
is to get an estimate of
the amount of antivenom
that would be required
to neutralize a bite.
Snake venom is lethal to us
because we are closely
related to snakes' main prey,
rodents.
Rodents and primates split
on the evolutionary tree
only 75 million years ago,
so we share a lot of the same biology,
from the structure of our cells
to the way our blood clots,
to how our nerves send signals.
- Venoms typically target very
conserved molecular pathways
that exist across maybe all vertebrates
or maybe even the entire
tree of life in some cases.
- [Derek] There are four ways
that snake venom can kill you.
It can be neurotoxic,
damaging to your nervous system and brain
by interfering with neurotransmitters,
the signaling chemicals
that go between neurons.
It can be hemotoxic,
thinning out your blood,
preventing wounds from healing
and causing internal bleeding.
It does this by disturbing
the delicate machinery
of the blood coagulation system.
Venom can also be cytotoxic,
attacking cells, leading
to severe blisters,
necrosis and cell death.
It can also be myotoxic,
destroying muscles and causing paralysis.
The worst part is that snake venoms
can contain up to 200 compounds.
Most venoms contain a
combination of neurotoxic,
hemotoxic, cytotoxic
and myotoxic proteins.
This is what makes snake
bites so difficult to treat.
It's not just one toxin
you're trying to neutralize,
but dozens all working
together to try to kill you.
- Come on.
Good boy.
There we go.
I've been at the park
for 10 years this year.
I've been running this
facility for 7 1/2, eight.
- Have you ever been bitten?
- Yeah, so about 3 1/2
years ago, I got a scratch.
One finger got nicked.
That was 36 hours in ICU
and eight of those were on a resus bay.
So very, very serious.
- [Derek] And what was
that experience like?
- That was crappy.
As it turns out,
I'm highly allergic to
antivenom, which is not ideal.
I started swelling up looking
like the Elephant Man.
So then they whack you with adrenaline
to cancel out the anaphylaxis
and then they have to
give you more anti-venom,
more adrenaline, more
anti-venom, more adrenaline,
more anti-venom, more adrenaline.
And thankfully, I only needed the one,
but it was like the best case scenario,
he didn't chew, he didn't bite,
but literally just a scratch.
- [Derek] So what is antivenom exactly?
and how was it invented?
In 1870, a British military
doctor, Edward Nicholson
was stationed in Burma,
and as he watched the
local snake handlers,
he noticed something strange.
They would from time to time
deliberately get Cobras to bite them
in what he considered a form of tattooing.
Nicholson reasoned that
they were intentionally
exposing their bodies to the venom
to develop an immune response.
He observed that the older snake handlers
were less affected by accidental bites
than the younger ones.
So this dangerous practice
seemed to be paying off.
20 years later in Saigon,
a French medical researcher
named Albert Calmette
was vaccinating local
residents against smallpox.
When he became aware of
the threat posed by Cobras,
he wondered if it was possible
to make a vaccine for snake bites.
Back in Paris, he tried injecting rabbits
with a tiny amount of Cobra venom
starting with just .03 milligrams,
but each week, he
injected the rabbits again
slowly increasing the dose.
And after eight months of this,
the rabbits were receiving
35 milligrams of Cobra venom at a time,
that is 15 times the normal
lethal dose in rabbits,
but they were still perfectly healthy.
The rabbits' immune systems
had developed antibodies
to neutralize the venom.
So you can be vaccinated
against snake bites
just as you can against disease,
but who wants to be vaccinated
against all different types of snakes
just in case one bites you?
It would be better, Calmette reasoned,
if you could administer
antibodies after a bite.
So he drew blood from a
venom resistant rabbit
and isolated the serum which
contains the antibodies,
and then he injected
it into another rabbit
that had never been exposed to venom.
When he subsequently injected it
with twice the lethal dose of Cobra venom,
the rabbit was just fine.
Immunity had been transferred
from one rabbit to another.
This was the first antivenom,
or as the Frenchman, Calmette
called it, antivenin,
which is why my phone always
makes that auto-correction.
To this day, antivenoms are
made in much the same way.
At the Reptile Park,
they collect and freeze the venom.
It's sent off to be diluted
and injected into a donor
animal, usually a horse.
Horses are used because of their size.
After increasing the dose
over a period of months,
the horse builds up immunity to the venom,
and then it's blood is drawn
and the antibodies are isolated.
Only the plasma is taken,
the red blood cells are
returned to the horse.
Those horse antibodies are
the life saving antivenom.
Antivenom works for the
same reason venom works,
because of our shared evolutionary history
with other mammals.
The antibodies produced by horses
are very similar to the
ones produced by humans,
so they bind to toxic
compounds and neutralize them
even in our bodies.
But this way of making
antivenom has downsides.
Collecting the venom is dangerous,
many donor animals are involved,
and some people are allergic to antivenom.
Scientists are now
exploring the possibility
of producing antivenom using
genetically modified bacteria.
They would produce the specific antibodies
needed to neutralize
each toxin in a venom,
but for now, this is the
way antivenom is made.
How's your arm?
- Yeah, it's a bit sore.
The shoulder is a bit tender.
- [Derek] The work Zac
and others like him do
saves countless lives
all around the world.
- If you're up here for fame and fortune,
and oh, look how tough
I am milking snakes,
you don't last long.
You get chewed on and you
go, oh, this is not for me.
If you're up here because
you love the animals
and this is an opportunity
to not only work with
the animals you love,
but to actively be a part of saving lives.
Like I'm not smart enough to be a doctor,
I'll put that out there straight away,
but I can swing a snake pretty good.
- Hey, milking snakes is
a very hands-on activity,
and so is learning with this
video's sponsor, Brilliant.
Brilliant is a website and app designed
to get you thinking deeply
about science, mathematics
and computer science.
They do this using highly
curated problem sets
and interactive puzzles.
For example, their course
on probability fundamentals
is excellent.
Now I've made a video
before on Bayes' theorem,
but in this course,
you go through the reasoning
behind it step by step.
Using interactive visuals,
you solve real world problems,
and I think they make the
lesson much more memorable
and they demystify Bayes' formula.
If you really wanna understand something,
you have to try it out for yourself,
answer questions and
learn from your mistakes,
that's what Brilliant allows you to do.
There are so many courses to choose from
in the areas of math,
science, and computer science,
and for viewers of this video,
Brilliant is offering 20% off
on annual premium subscription
to the first 200 people to sign up.
Just go to brilliant.org/veritasium
I will put that link
down in the description.
So I wanna thank Brilliant
for supporting Veritasium
and I wanna thank you for watching.